---
layout: posts
title: 2022 W14
category: Drafts
published: true
last_modified_at: 2022-04-06 23:00:00 +2044
---

### 1. Python Installation: Behind Proxy & Offline
Some portion of the python module I coded was for kind of works like reformatting large dataset and exporting the results to external storage by pickling items including pandas `DataFrame` object. I faced an issue when I tried loading a pickled data, which were processed using the same module but in my colleague's workspace. The colleague was newcomer to python programming and has been using newer version of python - he was using python 3.9.7 environment and I have been using 3.6.7 up to then... how lazy I am! -. The issue I faced with was from `backward incompatibility` between different versions of pandas. This post summarize what I did to create new environment with later version of python.

#### 1.1. Environment with internet connection:
- Create new virtenv using conda command:
(I am not sure whether it was the very command I used)
```yaml
conda create --name python-3.9.7 python=3.9.7
```
- New virtenv can simply be accessed by `activate` command:
```yaml
activate python-3.9.7
```
I think there might have been some more arguments I should provide for conda command to work behind proxy server but I am not sure. Packages can be installed behind proxy server using `--proxy` specifier, followed by the proxy server info. I have been using this specifier in combination with `--cert` specifier, after which I provided the path for proper certificate file I needed to mitigate the proxy.
```python
pip install --proxy "proxy:port" --cert "cert_path" "pkg_name"
```
But after I created new python environment, `--cert` specifier did not work any more but threw out OSError saying that the path for my certificate is invalid.  It simply solved by removing --cert speficier.


#### 1.2. Installation to off-line environment:

- Create new virtenv using conda command:
