---
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
title: Week 34, 2022
category: Diary
tag: Language
published: false
last_modified_at: 2022-08-25 21:52:00 +2044
---

## [TED Dictation 003] A PHOTOGRAPHIC JOURNEY THROUGH THE TALIBAN'S TAKEOVER OF AFGHANISTAN

Kiana Hayeri

Aug 17, 2022

Last year, I spent several months photographing the fast changes across Afghanistan, as we approached the 20th anniversary of the US invasion. At the time, I wanted `this assignment` to be a love letter to a `troubled land` that I had called home for seven years. Little did I know that it will become a goodbye letter to Afghanistan as I knew it.
Along with our brave local colleagues, we traveled across the Afghanistan. To look at how the last 20 years impacted people. `I was` specifically `drawn to hear from` the youth who grew up after the American invasion in an increasingly open society. They grew up in the world with Facebook, Twitter, American movies and TV shows. A world of new freedoms and opportunities. They also `endured` war and terrorism, poverty and dislocation, `barely` surviving under corrupt government and the perpetual threat of suicide bombings.
While the youth in conturyside mostly saw themselves either victimized or fighting for both sides of the conflict, the youths in urban areas had more options and dreams. Many of the young men and women that we met with were `hanging` on to the last `lays` of hope. As the contury was sinking into darkenss because of the American withdrawal and Taliban's imminent takeover. For me, confronting this was beginning of the end.
I want to take you on a journey, in the months leading to Taliban's takeover of Afghanistan. Then give you snapshots of people, as they lived through this transition. Last april I sat `down` on the cold cement floor of the prison with two teenage boys, who were `incarcerated` for their political charges at loose term for helping the Taliban.
14-year-old Muhammad Asif had two brothers, fighting on the two sides of the conflict. One for the Taliban and one for the army. He chose to follow the path of the brother who was 16 when he joined the Taliban and he was killed before he turned to 20.
I asked both boys to imagine themselves in 10 years. Mohammad Asif said nothing and `shrugged`. I challenged him to try harder. And see himself beyond this soulless cells of the prison. I took several tries, `he` eventually responded. "I don't know. I'll probabily be dead."
On the same trip, we visited `Karsai` Peak, which at that time was serving as the frontline for Afghanistan's national army fighting the Taliban. The mountain range was `peppered` with a dozens of `outposts`, housing soldiers and a militia unit.
Most fighters were in their early 20s, some of them were teenagers. Almost all of them `hadn't` been home `in months`. At the time, the unit was ambushed almost every night. The young men would stay up all night fighiting, and take turn to nap during the day.
On July 2nd, a month and a half before Taliban took over Afghanistan, they overran Karsai Peak. From the militia unit alone, 19 men were killed. Another 25 were taken hostage. All these young men were the legacy of the Americal invasion.
`Meet Hafiza`. The war drove her out of her village. And turned her sons into enermies. The conflict wedged itself in between her own family, as her sons took different paths in life. Her oldest son joined an anti-Taliban militia unit, anohter joined Taliban, and her two youngest were recruited by the army.
Here she's revealing an open wound on her throats, a wound that doctor's believe is caused by grief. During my visit to Afghanistan's National Institute of Music, the first and only music school in Afghanistan, I met 17 year old Sumbul, a brilliant viloinist. She's the symbol of this generation, `that` came of age with relative freedom and was `robbed of it` overnight.
Sumbul's family, come from one of the most `inaccessible` regions of Afghanistan. Her father was kidnapped several times by the Taliban, being pressured to pull his daughters out of music school. After the fall of Kabul, Taliban figthers raided ANIM school. Instruments were destroyed.
On August 26 Sumbul and her uncle were `outside` of the airport among the thousands of desperate Afghans trying to flee, when a suicide bomb `ripped` through the `crowd`.
Sumbul survived the attack. But her dream of performing inside Afghnaistan vanished, like 170 people who died all around her that day. Over the course of that final summer, we watched as the country rapidly `fell into` the hands of Taliban. One of my colleagues' tasks was to keep track of the fallen district. Another, to count the `fallen men`. We watched in `disbelief` as the 20 years of progress in women's rights, education, freedom of expression disappeared in 20 days.
On August 15, the day that Taliban took over Kabul, I left the house at 4 am and headed to the airport. To phothograph Afghans who were desperately trying to leave in anticipation of the Taliban's victory. By noon the Taliban fighters were marching on the street. And by early evening, they had taken over the presidential palace.
It was one of the most difficult decisions of my life to leave that day. As we were dashing to the airport, hundreds of people came to the street, running in every direction. I would never forget the panic on their faces.
I, myself, was `grappling` with immense guilt for leaving, and being able to leave. I was also heartbroken, thinking that I could never return, return to this home, that has shaped me not only as phothographer, but a human being.
Many Afghans have been devastated and overwhelmend with grief and fear since the fall. I recently caught of Sumbul and Hafiza to see where they `ended up` after the fall. Sumbul is healing her scarred soul while pursuing her dream in Europe. Hafiza had gone back to her villiage to spend some time with her sons.
The wound has not healed yet. Yet, I have to hang on to hope, hope our country with an open wounds, that is struggling to heal. Thank you.

## [TED Dictation 004] HOW SCHOOLS CAN NURTURE EVERY STUDENT'S GENIUS

Krish Millines Dziko

Aug 24, 2022

Let me tell you about the fifth-grade-students at Boze Elementary School in Tacoma. They spend the entire school year planning to colonize the planet Alpha Centauri, to create, to preserve future generations. They will get there on a multi-generational spacecraft, so that the grandkids of the people on the ship will arrive the Alpha Centauri, ready to start a new civilization.
Now projects like these usually start with a guiding question. And theirs is "How do you sustain life for a generation on a spacecraft?" These ten-year-olds get into initial conversations about governance on the spacecraft, the necessities to have `on` board. Is it even ethical to have a generation live and die on the spacecraft? And what roles are needed to create a functioning community?
There are some whispers and some head nods as `the` teacher explains to them that this quarter, they are expected to deliver a persuasive essay, a thirty-second elevator speech, a model of the section of the spacecraft in diorama form, a system of government with laws and a constitution, and a research display demonstrating their knowledge of planets. That's a lot.
But these students aren't `fazed`. They `had been here` before. What they are interested in is what group `they'll be in` and what roles they will play. `Now` I don't know about you, but when I was in fifth grade I wasn't doing that. But for many of these students, they have been learning like this since kindergarten. You heard that right, kindergarten.
`Shoot,` When I was in fifth grade, we `sat` in `cemetary row`, in academically segregated classrooms. And sadly things have not changed. In most schools students are sitting, listening to the teacher, and many of them scared to death `they'll` get called on to answer a question. And too often, students are totally `deflated` because the teacher is spending more time on classroom management than engaging them.
So these students and the generations behind them, they are our `talent pool` for everything for community organizating to running business, to running government and everything in between. And as it stands, our public education system is not cultivating future leaders. And in particular, students of color are constantly devalued in `marginalized`.
Regardless of background, students need to envison themselves as successful in life. And how teachers deliver the lessons plays a big role in that. The most common way they teach is through a textbook, `or a series of` textbooks, and a `scripted` curriculum, and `then`, let the test decide if the students learned anything.
And `while` you get coverage, it leaves little room for student voice, exploration, intellectual `rigor` and academic `risk-taking`. This is schooling, not educating. And a long term impact is that students likely won't have `that autonoumous` spirit they needed in working environment.
This is not what most of teachers signed up for. It's not. I don't think there is a single teacher candidate that say "I want to be a teacher so I can help kids to pass standardized tests."
25 years ago I left my 17 year tech career, and cofounded a non-profit that prepared students of color for jobs in the tech industry. And over time we'd learned about our student's experiences in the public education system, and we began to wonder what would happen if we rebuild public schools to develop the genius in every student and give them the tools to be critical thinkers, problem solvers, ideators and leaders.
So we got a bunch of educators to help us answer that questions. Today my job is to set the vision and strategy for how we partner with public schools to create collaboratve, anti-racist learning environments grounded in equity, `where` students can actively participate in their own education instead of memoryzing for test, where the curriculum is delivered in a way that supports the needs of our students, where professionals in the community are invited to participate in teaching and learning.
The teaching and learning is built on interdisciplinary project-based learning, one of the most equitable ways to teach. This approach enables teachers to understand how each student learns, use multiple ways to assess their knowledge. and then make instructional adjustments based on the result.
`You know`, students, they get a chance to set their own goals. They have time to discuss the work. They take academic `risks`. And along the way, they get to discover who they are as learners. `And` speaking `of` learners, let's take a visit to our fifth-grade Alpha Centaurians and listen in as `their` teacher faciliates a discussion about how the Native Americans live.
They talk about the logistics and the preparation behind the colonizers' move out west and how colonizers always had conflicts with Native Americans.
And the students `vow` that they will do better on Alpha Centauri, they will `ensure` that everyone has equal rights and lives well. And you better believe it will be part of their constitution.
And if you `poke` your head in the classroom next door which is `rather loud`, you will see the kids are in there small groups using their math skills to calculate the human capacity for their spacecraft. And another set of students will be working on their planet research
When we visit a week or so later, there might be a visiting engineer talking to the students about design specifications or the classroom could be empty because the students are at the Museum of Flight, sitting in real spacecraft and learning how they work. Bringing that `authentic` context to learning help students retain knowledge and generate new ideas.
After weeks and weeks of working on their projects, `and giving` each other authentic, supportive feedback, and doing `that` fine tuning, the students are ready for the big day: the exhibition of learning. This is where hundereds of people from the community, the most important members `being` their parents and families, come to see the students present their work.
The students are all dressed up, they are little nervous, they are excited at the same time kind `of` like me right now. And the teachers are beaming with pride as they recognize how far each student has come in their learning journey.
Okay and the parents? The parents are high-fiving and "You get it girl!", and "That's my baby!", and "You go boy!" And there's just so much praise. And the students feel accomplished and more confident. This is project-based learning in action. These students are developing the advanced critical thinking skills they will use throughout their lives.
They are learning through exploration. There is `confirmation` their unique voice matters. These students have the freedom to create a world with their 10-year-old imaginations. That's actually grounded in academic rigor! This is educating versus schooling.
There is teacher support, diverse interactions, team building and practical application of reading, writing, math and science. An environment where real learning is happening.
And students are discovering their own genius. Plus I have to say, it's just a lot of fun to learn this way. Students who attend our `partner` schools learn this way in every single stage of their academic career. Starting in the kindergarden, students are encouraged to share their views, ask questions, and support each other. They are creating a community in an environment that is safe and their own.
In middle school, the students are starting to become socially aware. They care about things like world hunger, immigration and homelessness. One year, the 7th graders `at TAF at Saghalie in Federal Way` turned their classrooms into an immigration museum, exploring the historic contemporary issues of immigration.
And the 6th graders used food to learn about each others' cultures. They created cookbooks with recipes and stories from their conturies of origin. And then on exhibition night, they cooked for everybody and it was actually pretty good.
By the time the students get to high school, they have enough experiences that they can address a wide range of issues and opportunities. A group of 10th graders created wearable technology that detected `the flare-up` signs in `sickle-cell anemia`.
Experiencing gentrification, in their own neighborhoods, 11th graders created a plans and models for equitable, financially sustainable urban neighborhoods. The list goes on and on.
This is how we develop the strong leaders and critical thinkers of tommorow. Our students deserve to learn in an environment that includes and understands their unique voice, their individual genius.
If we're going to rebuild public eudcation, we have to be on a continuous cycle of recognizing, intentionally undoing, and ultimately replacing the institutional practices that undereducate and harm our children.
And there are couple of things that we can do right now. We could reallocate the tens of millions of dollars each states spends on standardized test every year, and we can invest the majority of that in teacher professonal development so that our teachers can continually `hone their` instructional and assessment skills.
And then we can take the rest `and` invest it in national effort to `curate` authentic assessment methods and projects `from` teachers all over the country. I belive that this will bring joy and respect back to teaching. We also need to embed racial equity in the DNA of how we operate schools.
Acheving racial equity is a journey that requires dedication, consistency and `accountability` it needs to be normallized as part of the daily practice of `principals`, administrators, teachers and staff.
We can do this. We can. All it takes is political will. Education either functions as an instrument to bring about `conformity` or freedom. Let's give our children freedom. Thank you.

## [TED Dictation 005] THE PROBLEMS WITH PLASTICS

Patricia Villarrubia-Gomez

Aug 25, 2022

So, plastics, plastics come in all shapes, forms and colors. They are everywhere. They're in our makeup, it packages our food, and insulates our homes. They are in airplanes and `our favorite` electronic devices.
They are truly a remarkable material but so are `its` troubles. And we produce and consume plastics in `staggering` quantities. Since it has been mass produced, the world has created over 10 billimon metric tons of it, half of them just in the past 20 years.
I have been investigating plastic pollution about a decade, and I `try` to align my personal choices as consumer with the aspirations for my research. And you might think "Oh, that's easy. You know how to do it." But actually it's not. Sometimes it seems impossible to avoid single use plastics. The system is built that way.
The dominant narrative of our plastics tell us that this is the consumer's `and` a waste management problem, who of us here have not heard about `the tales` of gigantic plastic islands floating in the middle of the ocean. Which by the way, it's not true.
`And that low-income conturies are to` blame for most of the plastic waste entering in our oceans. But this narrative is a misleading or oversimplication of a much bigger, much complex story. Plastics and their chemical additives are really a climate problem.
Now, we need to think of plastics from a systemic perspective. So, let me take you thorugh the journey of plastics. Plastics contribute to climate change from before the moment they're produced, so to long beyond the moment they're disposed or landfill or drift `into` to the ocean.
And it will remain in the environment for centuries, degrading ecological processes. For 99% of all plastics, their starting point is fossil-fuel hydrocarbons. Oil, gas, and coal are extracted and refined to produce plastic and other synthetic chemicals. In those processes generate green house gases such as CO2 and methane.
Studies indicate that if nothing is done, the production of single use plastic alone will contribute to more than 10% of all green house gas emmisions by 2050. And the thing is that, our use of plastic last often just a few minutes or a few hours. Then we throw it away. And that generates further emmissions.
And we know that our recyling system doesn't work. It's broken everywhere. And recycling plastics is hard and not cost-competitive. Most of the waste that has not be in landfill`ed` or incinerated domestically is shipped across the planet. And it reaches low-income conturies, where they're expected to be recycled.
But this is one of those `hypocrises` of globalization where rich conturies outsource their problems to low-income conturies. And we know that these conturies do not have the capacity nor the technology to deal with them in a soundly manner. And so, huge amount of plastics are illegally incinerated in formally dumped or get lost at sea. And as a result, millions of tons of plastics every year gets into our environment.
But even plastics that are soundly managed it make green house gases. Once plastic enter into environment landfill are dispersed in soil or water, they start a process of breaking down into micro and nanoparticles. I will just call them microplastics for the sake of the conversation today.
And this processes of breaking down emits powerful gases such as methane, ethylene, and CO2. And that's true for the both: traditional and biodegradable plastics. On the surface of microplastics, a new `microbial` communities can grow. We call them the `plastisphere`. And the biological activity also release additional CO2 and nitrous oxide into the environment, creating the possibility of further magnifying the climate problem.
And it is the microplastic can also `impair` the growth and photosynthesis capacity of `phytoplankton` which are the microorganisms producing much of the oxygen we breathe. But also microplastics can have toxic effect on     `zooplankton` and the health of these organisms are essential for the functioning of all aquatic food webs.
And unfortunately the problems run even deeper. Microplastics bind with so called "marine snow", which are made out of the `clumps` of bacteria, plancton and all other organic materials that sinks down into ocean deep acting like biological carbon pump. But microplastics `risk affecting` this marine snow. And potentially decreasing the capacity of the ocean to absorb and `sequester` carbon from the atmosphere. 
And microplastics can be decreasing in the reflective property of snow and ice. Potentially accelerating the melting of glaciers and polar ice. So, we have early enough indications that plastic pollution is starting to change the processes that allow the earth's climate system to work.
And this pollution is not a localized phenomenon. Microplastics are everywhere, from the mountain tops of Everest, to the deepest sediment in the Mariana trench. They are in the air we breathe, the water we drink, and the food we eat. They are now found in our bloodstreams and our lungs. And personally, the most terrifying, in the `placenta` our `unborn` children.
Now, of course plastic is a great material. It's versatile and durable. And in many ways it has allowed modern civilization to develop in the way it has. But it also comes with a lot of problems and the outlook is worrying.
Today the total mass of plastic is twice the total mass of all living organisms on the planet. But still, fossil fuel companies sees hydrocarbons as their primary growth sector, projecting in a 30% increase of the virgin plastic, for single use plastic just in the next 5 years.
We already see an accelearting `pace` in producing and releasing new chemicals because there're many many kinds of plastic each one the result of a different chemical formula and we know that this is incompatible with `staying within` safe operating space for humanity.
And given how plastics impact the climate and world's social ecological system, this would `spell` a catastrophe. But wait, I'm not saying that we're completely doomed yet. There are solutions. And `it's that` worldwide, `enterpreneurs` and companies are creating new designs of materials that can substitute traditional single use plastic. And social movement, I am consolidating and educating people to reduce the plastic footprint. And pressuring local and world policymakers to enact strong policies.
And scientists are collaborating more than ever, communicating the urgency to limit not only the volume but the chemical diversity of plastics. In ealry this year, representatives from over 170 nations at the UN environment assembly adopted an initiative to end plastic pollution, `committing` in all these conturies to participate in creating by 2024 a legally binding agreement that addresses the full lifecycle of plastics, from production, to design, to disposal. 
We need to stop thinking `of plastic just as a waste problem`, one that can be solved by changing consumer's habits alone and stopping using plastic bags. `We need to think of plastics as` a climate problem, as a product `that creates damage along all its journey`, `from the drilling up of` hydrocarbons `to the spread of microplastics`, and that can only be addressed in a systematic way. thank you.
