---
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
title: Week 33, 2022
category: Diary
tag: Language
published: false
last_modified_at: 2022-08-19 17:00:00 +2044
---

## [TED Dictation 001] THE HUMANS AT THE CENTER OF US IMMIGRATION

Ali Noorani

Aug 19, 2022

Coming out of the bright Texas sunshine. My eyes `squinted` under the harsh fluorescent lights. There were grey rubber bucket sits, bolted to the ground, white vinyl tiles, `cinder` black walls.  We walked through the metal detector and gave our IDs to the guard.  And we put our cellphones in lockers.  Another guard came and escorted us down a hallway into a small courtroom.  In the gallery on the right, on the front rows, was a group of men wearing orange jumpsuits and wearing bright `Crocs`.  On the left side of the gallery in the front, was a small group of women, same orange jumpsuits, same Crocs.
Our small `delegation` took up the back two rows of the immigration court at the El Paso immigrant detention facility.  On the bench to the left and right of the judge, was a clerk and interpreter. Coming out from the bench, few feet down, was a table, perpendicular. On the right side of the table was sit an attorney representing `Immigration and Customs Enforcement`. On the left side of the table, if the detainee had representation, would sit their attorney. At the end of the table facing the judge, would be the detainee. Often, the most times wearing translation headphones, speaking into a thin microphone. The judge, for every single case, would in essence read the very same instructions describing the process, what would come next, what to expect. He made sure the immigrants had any questions, if they have questions and they answered but they were also able to explain their side of the case.
The attorney with Immigration and Customs Enforcement, if the detainee had representation, would pay close attention. And she would make the case of the government much more forcefully if there was representation. Every single case that morning was either delayed or denied. Then a young woman came and sat at the end of the table facing the judge, in front of the thin microphone, wearing the orange jumpsuit and the Crocs. The judge, leaning forward, flipped through the case file, asked some clarifying questions, looked down at the young woman, and she explained with the `poise` and a clarity that other detainees didn't have, what her situation was. She had fled political violence in Nicaragua.  The judge turned to the attorney representing Immigration Enforcement and the attorney, sensing the power of the case but also the poise of the young woman, spoke very loudly and very aggresively and she accused this young woman of being a part of the quote "caravan", that, in her words, stormed Mexico's southern border and put policeman and babies in `harm's way` and she angrily cited provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act and urged the judge to deny `bond`.
In the face of this `onslaught`, this young woman, all this being translated into her headphones, was calm. And she answered those accusations and those concerns and she told the judge "I fled political violence in Nicaragua" and then her voice rose and she leaned forward into the microphone. And she said "I have been detained for six months. And I left Nicaragua far long before the caravans began. And the one thing that I want to do" she said, as she was leaning forward "is to be with my family." The immigration attorney looked down. The judge, for the first time that morning, leaned back. He flipped through the case file, asked a few more questions, and he granted this young woman a bond of five thousand dollars.
This young woman, who had been treated like a criminal by our immigration system, who was afforded no legal representation, who was unfairly accused of violence by United States government, broke down in tears. And so did we. Because look, no migrant wants to leave their home. But, because of violence, corruption, poverty, climate change, record numbers of migrants are leaving their homes. But they are leaving with dignity. And whether it's a dangerous journey from Nicaragua to El Paso, from Haiti to Del Rio, or from Syria to Twin Falls, they are fighting at every step of the way to maintain their dignity, until they reach the United States border. Because as I witnessed, in that courtroom in El Paso, it is our immigration system that strips the dignity from migrants.
So through our years of work at the National Immigartion Forum, through our work in conservertive communities with `pastors`, police chiefs and business owners, we have come to believe very strongly that the `reconciliation` of our nation of immigrants does not begin in Washington, DC. the reconcilation of our nation of immigrants begins in communities accross the country. Because that is the only way that we will restore the dignity of the immigarants, and the dignity of the contury.
So let me tell you about Storm Lake, Iowa. In 1989 two people started a journey that eventually took them to Storm Lake. It is a small meat-processing town in the northwestern part of the state. Maria Ramos at this time is tweleve years old. Her parents told her and her sisters that they are taking them to a beautiful place. And they are excited to leave their small villiage outside of Puerto Vallarta for the very first time. But it is a dangerous, and as she told me, it is a sad and overwhelming journey. There are multiple times where they are told to hide. There are multiple times when they are almost discovered by the authorities. Because for Maria Ramos and her family, crossing borders meant that they cross US-Mexico border in 1989 by foot.
2,000 miles later and multiple vehicles, they finally made it to Northen california. In 1989 Mark Prosser left East St. Louis to drive 500 miles to Storm Lake, Iowa, where he began a thiry-year career as the chief of the police. Now in the 80s and the 90s, Storm Lake is changing dramatically. There are two large meat-proccessing plants providing 75% of the region's jobs that means that there is a large `Laotian` population, there is a large Vietnamese population, and there is fast growing Latino population 
In the early 90s, in fact, Maria Ramos moves to Storm Lake to be with her soon-to-be husband, who works one of those facilities and soon Maria Ramos is a young undocumented mother in Storm Lake. In 1996 seeing how the tension is building in Storm Lake and how these populations in communities are starting to `rub up` against each other, Patrick Buchanan brings his presidental campaign to Storm Lake. And the nativist `ire` that comes with Patrick Buchanan. `Lo and behold`, three months later Immigration Enforcement raids one of these facilities. Maria Ramos, remember, an undocumented mother, her husband detained in one of this facilities, goes into hiding. Chief Mark Prosser, seeing how the immigrant community in Storm Lake is treated, penned like `cattle`, as the local newspaper editor told me, vowed never to work with Immigration Enforcement again. But regardless, what's happened in that Storm Lake is suddenly the middle of the nation's immigration debate.
And the leardership of Storm Lake is presented with a very clear choice. they can go down the path that Patrick Buchanan gave them to nativism and fear and hate, or they can try to find a path towards a reconsiliation and dignity. Chief Mark Prosser to a large degree led the effort to organize leadership of the town to go across the town, the county, the state, the country, and make the case that Storm Lake was safer, it was growing, it was thriving because of the immigrants and immigration.
And the other piece of this that's so remarkable is that new leaders started to emerge in Storm Lake over this period of time. In fact, it was Maria Ramos. In 2019 Maria Ramos decided she's going to run for Storm Lake City Council and she wins. And she is supported by Mark Prosser and so many others from Storm Lake who have been fighting for immigrants and immigration over these decades.
As Maria told the local paper "We needed woman representation and what's better than a latina woman?" And as I was sitting with her she told me "I would not be able to do what I do if I had stayed in Mexico. So I needed to step up and do something good for this country." Which ultimately is my message today. We all need to step up and do something good for this country. Because our character as individuals, our character as a nation is determined to such a large extent by the way that we treat immigrants and refugees regardles of their legal status.
So together as a community we need to bring the nation together around an immigration system that provides a path to citizenship for the undocumented so just like Maria Ramos can fully own the American dream as a US citizen, so can the other 11 million undocumented immigrants. We need to bring the nation together around the legal immigration system that provides pathways for legal entry so that families that follow Ramos family don't have to pay `cartels`. And yes, we as nation need to come together around an enforcement system that keeps us safe and secure but treats people compassionately.
The policy questions at their core are easy they are simple and straightforward. Reconsiling our communities, our culture, our politics, are more difficult. But what we have seen across the contury is that across religion, across race, `ethnicity`, across politics, across gender, people are doing this work and it is heroic. In Twin Falls, Idaho you have conservative `dairymen` working with immigrants and refugees some from Syria, to convene pastors, police chiefs and business owners to create unity alliance around immigration in conservative southern Idaho. Across the contury you have conservative and moderate `evangelical` women working together to welcome Afghan families into their communities, into their churches. But more than that, these women are sitting together to return to their Bible and ask themselves a question how do I truly welcome the stranger.
In the past, I would have said that these are unlikely allies, you know, working together for immigrant justice.  But what I have seen over the last ten years through our work what we have done, what we do on our day-to-day basis, leads me to belive that this is slowly but surely becoming the norm.  Because as my friend Ai-Jen Poo who founded National Domestic Workers Alliance told me she said that there are no unlikely allies in the stories of human dignity. Thank you.



## [TED Dictation 002] THE BLIND SPOTS OF THE GREEN ENERGY TRANSITION

Olivia Lazard

Aug 20, 2022

Hi! It's about as `intimidating` as I thought it would be. And yet you'd think or I'd think that I'd be accustomed to more stressful situations. You see I work in international security and in confilict resolution. And today I'm here to talk about some of our blind spots related to the decarbonization.
Now "What does one have to do with the other?" you may ask. Good question. We often hear that a `climate-safe` future is a necessary condition for the peace. That's true. We also often hear that renewables could be the energy of peace. Less true. To understand, I need to tell you about the materials that we need in order to decarbonize. They are pretty, and they can be deadly.
Looking into their story tells us that confronting confilict in building new forms of international peace are going to be critical foundations to build a climate-safe future. So let me tell you about them, starting with where we stand now. When we talk about a decarbonized future, we generally have in mind the possibility of decupling economic growth from green house gas emmisions. That's what we call "green growth".
What we tend to think about less often is that to get there, we need to recouple economic growth with intensive mineral extraction. To harness renewables of renewable energy like sun and wind we obviously need to build technologies such as solar panels, windmills, batteries. Right? And to build those we need to mine huge quantities of non-renewable materials such as these. Knowing that it takes mines as big as these to produce that much amount of usable material. Our ticket to green growth, in other words, is digging deep in the environment.
Now we know that mining can have great impact to local ecosystems and populations. I've seen it myself, and it really isn't pretty. But what I wanna talk about today is about how much and where we're gonna have to dig and what that means for planetary security and for geopolitics.
I'll start from there. History tells us that when the dominant source of energy changes power relations changes as well. Countries that can transform energy to their own advantage can gain the upper hand economically and politically and then can put themselves at the center of the global order. Think of the united kingdom and coal for instance, or how oil determined the ascendence of the US to global superpower.
What that tells us is that the access to and processing of energy literally materializes into the ability to shape geopolicitcal power dynamics. And today we are facing the challenge of implementing the biggest energy transition in the history of human kind under a ticking climate clock. The race is on for new generation of power. At the heart of which you have all of the critical materials that we need to decarbonize on the one hand and digitalize on the other.
So what's happening with them? On the demand side, we are at the beginning of an exponential demand curve. If you take lithium as the proxy, a key component of the battery, global production already increased by just short of 300% between 2010 and 2020. I'm gonna pause here for a sec. This is really good news. It means that decarbonization is in motion. The not so good news is that our clean future is going to be more materially intensed than before.
If you take simple measure for it, the international energy agency tells us that with the current level of innovation an electric car requires 6 times more mineral inputs than a conventional car and this is only the start. The world bank tells us that with current projections global production for minerals such as graphite and cobalt will increase by 500% by 2050 only to meet the demand for clean energy technologies.
Now let's look on the supply side thats where a lot of really interesting things are happening. Who currently exploits and processes minerals and where deposits to meet furture demand are located tell us exactly how the transition is going to change geopolitics. So if you look at a materials such as lithium, conturies like Chile and Austrailia tend to dominate extraction while China dominates processing. For cobalt, the Democratic Republic of Congo dominates extraction, while china dominates processing. For nickel, conturies like Indonesia and the Philippines tend to dominate extraction while China -you guessed it, thank you- dominates processing. For rare earth, China dominates extraction, while China dominates processing. I've just said China a lot, didn't I?
Well that's because China skillfully leveraged its geoeconomic rise to power over the last two decades on the back of integrating supply chains for rare earths from extraction to processing to export. We tend to point fingers at China today for not going fast enough on its own domestic energy transistion, but the truth is that China understood already long ago that it would play an essesntial role in other conturies' transitions.
And it is: the Europian Union for instance is 98% dependent on China for rare earth. Needless to say, this puts China in a prime position to redesign the global balance of power. Now you may argue that this is a good thing, because a global balance of power need a rehaul anyway. And you know what? I can totally roll with that.
But --and this applies to China, the United states, and any otehr big player-- we need to make sure that the redesigning process doesn't compromise on human rights, or open societies, and that it doesn't lead to the weaponization of supply chains at a time of international instability and more importantly, at a time of complete climate breakdown.
Unfortunately we're already seeing signs of this happening. China is currently trying to gain access to more mineral resources through its `Belt and Road` initiative. The United States and Europe are both thinking of `reshoring` critical mining and proessing and orienting some of their international partnerships to facilitate access to more mineral resources. Japan is exploring some of its oceanic, marine reserves to build strategic reserves.
I am also speaking in the shadow of war on the European continent. Now at first sight Russia's invasion of Ukraine has nothing to do with what have been talking about. But Ukraine happens to be mineral-rich. It also happens to be one of only two conturies that had struck a partnership with European Union to diversify and develop supply chains for critical raw materials. That partnership was specifically designed to help the EU decarbonize and in the process to better integerate with Ukraine from a political and economic perspective. Eight month after the partnership was struck, the invasion took place.
Now, mineral resources may not explain everyting about the war. But they certainly can't be ignored in analyzing the events. Because when it comes to the race for critical raw materials, which is actually happening, is that we're headed right back into a new scramble of resources. At the heart of which, you find all of the big players, `eyeing` conturies with vast mineral deposits.
And yet it's so obvious many of these conturies are located for the most part in Africa, and Latin America, and Central Asia and Indopacific. Economists will tell you that this is a great thing. Because these conturies, at least lot of them need economic resources and many to accelerate their development pathway and climate adaptation. But many of these conturies also have very real overlapping risk profiles.
The Internatioanl Institute of Sustainable Development first produced this map back in 2018. Can you see the green dots on the map? They represent all of the different materials that we need in order to decarbonize, their geographic locations, and their deposit size. As it so happens, a lot of deposits are located in conturies that rank fairly high on corruption indices. They are represented essentially by the shades of brown and red on the map. And as it so happens, a lots of the materials are also located in conturies that are fragile such as Sri Lanka, or `downright` conflict affected, like Myanmar and the Central African Republic.
That's not all the Notre Dame Institute tells us with this map in which you see again some red and orange that counturies are the climate-vulnerable are also the ones that are resource endowed.
And one final thing you know those big ecosystems we need to prodect and regenerate in order to stabilize global climate regime to reboot the hydrological cycle and to protect biodiversity. They're also represented in orange and red on this map. Many of these big ecosystems are located in the same fragile conturies that I was mentioning before. They also happen to sit on the vast minimal deposits.
Changing or eliminating these ecosystems through mining, through `deforestation`, or anything else would undermine planetary security not just international security planetary security.
It's essentially like a perfect storm in the making. Corruption instituional and socioeconomic fragility climate distruptions and environmental `plundering` all acting as a `backdrop` to a competition to gain access to the minerals that we need in order to decarbonize. All of these factors will be magnified if we don't `rein in` the scramble for the resources. All of them will reinforce one another.
And I wanna make something very clear here. The conturies at the heart of resource scrambling may suffer the most direct consequences in terms of their ability to develop to adapt to climiate change and to avoid violence. But their fate is not isolated. Their problems are not geographically distant.
A big blind spot here is that we're headed towards a decarbonization trajectory that may end up undermining ecological integrity and heighten the risks of confilict and insecurity whose consequence would `reverberate` worldwide.
I know that this is not a particularly encoraging picture. And that it comes on top of layers of pictures that are not particularly encouraging. A modern economies have advanced and grown for two centuries through the gigantic blind spot, a fossil fuel exploitation and its unintended consequences. The big lesson here is that we can't afford to just shift to a different set of energies, technologies, and materials without paying attention to the unintended consequences.
The `stakes` are too high. They involve our future that we know, but they also involve our humanity. And they involve our nature, by which I mean the nature that we choose for ourselves. Decarbonization is the way forward. There's not one single doubt allowed about this. But the way forward also demand of us that we start to imagnine our future beyond decarbonization already.
Remember what I said at the begining? I climate-safe future is a necessary condition for peace. But we won't achieve a climate-safe future without peace. And to build peace, we need to shake things up in international politics and in the way that we do our business and economics.
So where do we start? I would like to offer the scaffolding of a plan in 4 different basckets. First, science. Science can tell us exactly where it is safe to mine, and where it isn't from ecological perspective. Where it isn't safe to mine, we need to act as though these minerals did not exist, and establish protected areas under which no mining lisencing can take place. Where mining does take place, we can integrate socioeconomic and ecological regeneration within business models.
Second, a global public good regime. If decarbonization is a matter of human survival, then the materials that we need in order to decarbonize should be managed collectively under a global public good regime. The alternative is confilict and planetary breakdown. So while we figure out exactly how to design this regime, the conturies at the heart of scramble for resources should receive adequate support, competent and coherent support to face off the joint challenges of geopolitical competition and climate disruptions on the other hand. In other words, investing into conflict resolution into the fight against corruption and into `context-specific resiliance` should be top priorities of our global energy transition.
Third, changing the way we do business and economics. We can't just switch from one energy system to another I've made that pretty clear. Right? What we need instead is to reduce our need for energy and for materials and that starts with massive public and private inverstment into circular economic models that favor recyclability and material substitution.
Now here's the thing: we know that this is a necessary step but not a sufficient one. So what we also need to do is to develop ecological asssessment of supply chains that account for green house gas emissions, but also for water, soil, biodiversity, material and energy footprint all at once. Only on this all-encompassing basis, will we understand how supply and distribution chains need to change and therefore how globalization needs to transform.
Fourth, Innovation. All of these can only happen if we start to shifting or thinking about innovation. Innovation in our times is about bringing back economic footprint within planetary boundaries. Anything else, even the coolest of new products, if it isn't alinged with that goal, it's not innovation. It's business as usual.
In our little corner of the world, my team and I at Carnegie Europe have been working really hard to identify what regenerative foreign policy looks like and what it aims for. There are two things that we know by now: one is obvious. We need to tackle fundamental issues around economic redistribution in global scale. The other thing is that we need a geopolitical de-escalation around decarbonisation and regeneration. We've translated that into a concept we've called ecological diplomacy. And we are pushing really hard for European Union to adopt this framework within their foreign policy.
Because if there is one thing that we've understood. It is that ecological integrity is the foundation for all types of security which makes that the one common denominator that we can work on rebuilding collectively. And we can manage. Truly I believe that we can. As long as we shed lights on a transition blindspots and take them as a guiding companions to identify what truly systemic, truly peaceful, and truly safe solution pathways look like for the age of climate disrupted futures. Thank you so much.
